NOTES FOR HC06D COMPLETED ON 10/08/2021

DATA FILE DETAILS



Byte Location, Byte Size, Explanation
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


1-2           , 2           , Bureau record identifier - hc
4-9           , 6           , Bureau of Meteorology Station Number.
11-26         , 16          , Year month day hour minute in YYYY,MM,DD,HH24,MI format in Local Standard Time
28-32         , 5           , Wind speed measured in km/h
34            , 1           , Quality of wind speed
36-40         , 5           , Wind direction measured in degrees
42            , 1           , Quality of wind direction
44            , 1           , # symbol, end of record indicator.




PARAMETER NOTES
---------------




WIND

Wind speed and direction are typically an average over the 10 minutes prior to the observation time. Measurements are made 
using an automatic anemometer, usually at a height of approximately 10 metres above the surface. At stations without an 
automatic anemometer, a weather observer usually uses a hand held anemometer or ventimeter, or uses the Beaufort scale to 
estimate wind speed 
http://www.bom.gov.au/lam/glossary/beaufort.shtml.

Wind speed is usually measured by the anemometer in whole knots, but archived in SI units of m/s 
to 1 decimal point (0.1 m/s). 1m/s = 1.94kn = 3.6km/h approximately.
Wind direction can be output as either degrees (true) or 16 points of the compass.

When the wind speed is zero, the wind direction is also zero (i.e. calm conditions).

The Bureau's wind measurements are designed to satisfy weather and climate monitoring needs.

The Bureau's current uncertainty tolerances for automatic wind speed measurements are +/- 5% of the wind 
speed for wind speeds greater than or equal to 10 m/s and +/- 0.3 m/s for wind speeds below 10 m/s.

As equipment is modernised at observing stations, the Bureau's continuous improvement requirement 
is to ensure that no change in equipment or algorithm results in wind speed measurements with a 
higher uncertainty, and where possible decreases uncertainty.

In 2010, with the incorporation of new monitoring equipment with improved algorithms to convert raw 
outputs into wind speed, a step change downwards in the wind speed measurements has occurred of the 
order of 0.5 m/s at some stations. Investigations have not lead to any evidence that the wind speed 
measurements using the Telvent Automatic Weather Station are outside the Bureau's uncertainty tolerance. 
We are confident that the new measurements provide a better estimate of the true wind speed, and may 
ultimately result in revised and improved uncertainty tolerances for Bureau wind speed measurements of 
both the past and future. We are now investigating ways to apply this knowledge to the past wind record.





GENERAL NOTES
-------------




TIME

UTC - Coordinated Universal Time (sometimes called Greenwich Mean Time or GMT).

Local Standard Time - The globe is divided into Standard time zones and Local Standard Time is the time specified for 
each zone. This is usually done in terms of hours ahead or behind UTC.

Local Time - the time according to the local clock. Normally this is the same as Local Standard Time, but during 
Daylight Saving in eastern states an hour is added to the local clock in Australia, making Local Time an hour ahead of 
Local Standard Time.
When Daylight Saving begins the clock moves forward an hour at 2:00 am to 3:00 am. Synoptic observations continue 
according to the local clock.
When Daylight Saving ends the clock moves back an hour at 3:00 am to 2:00 am. Synoptic observations continue according to the local clock.

Care needs to be taken if analysing data against Local Time due to Daylight Saving, as a 9 am observation during 
Daylight Saving is really an 8 am observation in Local Standard Time. For elements such as temperature the difference 
can be significant, as the temperature at this time of day is often rising quickly.

Daylight Saving has been used in many Australian states since 1973, and on limited occasions prior to this. The changeovers 
generally occur in October and March, but exact dates vary from State to State and year to year. More information can be found 
at: http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/averages/tables/daysavtm.shtml

Please note that synoptic observations are made to a local time schedule in Australia, but to a UTC schedule at Antarctic 
Stations. Some Antarctic stations adhere to Daylight Savings and others do not. They also do not always adhere to the Local 
Standard Time applicable to their longitude.





QUALITY FLAG DESCRIPTIONS

Y: quality controlled and acceptable
N: not quality controlled
W: quality controlled and considered wrong
S: quality controlled and considered suspect
I: quality controlled and inconsistent with other known information




LATITUDES AND LONGITUDES

Latitudes and longitudes are given to 4 decimal places, but in many cases will not be accurate to 
4 decimal places. This is because in the early days the positions of stations were estimated from 
maps. Gradually the network of open stations is being checked (and if necessary corrected) using 
GPS (Global Positioning System). The method used is given in the station details file.




WMO INDEX NUMBER

This is the number assigned to a station that makes international weather reports. The number is not 
actively used in the climate archive, and only a few hundred such numbers are assigned at any time. 
These are not perpetual but may be reassigned where a station no longer makes the international reports 
(synops); thus a particular number cannot be regarded as unique and exclusive to any particular station.




PERCENTAGE INFORMATION

No percentage completeness of data is available for this product (HC06D). Percentages are only given for 
quality flags.
An "*" is used if the percentage of values with a particular quality flag is non-zero and less than 0.5%.




GAPS AND MISSING DATA

Very few stations have a complete unbroken record of climate information. A station 
may have been closed, reopened, upgraded to a full weather station or downgraded 
to a rainfall only station during its existence causing breaks in the record for 
some or all elements. Some gaps may be for one element due to a damaged instrument 
or infrastructure outages and others may be for all elements due to the absence or 
illness of an observer.




INSTUMENTS AND OBSERVATIONAL PRACTICES

Historically a nearby station (within about 1 mile in earlier days) may have used the same 
station number. There may have been changes in instrumentation and/or observing practices 
over the period included in a dataset, which may have an effect on the long-term record.
In recent years many stations have had observers replaced by Automatic Weather Stations, 
either completely or at certain times of the day.




ROUNDING

The primary way of sending weather information around the world is via a coded message known as a SYNOP. 
In earlier years, the message only allowed some measurements to be sent as rounded values. At staffed 
stations, many of these values were subsequently typed in with greater precision (normally to one decimal 
place a few months later once manuscript records were sent in). If consecutive values all have a zero in 
the decimal place, then it is almost certain that rounding was used earlier.
The introduction of a new message format addressed this issue in the latter part of the record.




COPYRIGHT

The copyright for any data is held in the Commonwealth of Australia and the purchaser 
shall give acknowledgement of the source in reference to the data.  Please refer to the 
relevant Agreement and Schedule provided with this data for the terms of use of this data. 
Further enquiries should be sent to climatedata@bom.gov.au




LIABILITY

While every effort is made to supply the best data available this may not be possible
in all cases.  We do not give any warranty, nor accept any liability in relation 
to the information given, except that liability (if any), that is required by law.





IF DATA IS NOT AS REQUESTED

If the data provided are not as requested, the data will be repeated at no extra cost, 
provided that:

a) the Bureau is notified within 60 days,

b) the data is returned to the Bureau for checking, and 

c) there has been a fault or error in providing the data.


Where there has been no fault or error of provision, the cost involved in
requested corrective action such as resending the data or providing alternative
stations will be charged for as necessary.





STATION DETAILS FILE

The Station Details file, identified by 'StnDet' in the file name, contains the details for 
the stations provided. If the station is now closed, the details are those which applied when 
the station was closed. Many stations have been moved, downgraded, upgraded etc. over the years.

Byte Location, Byte Size, Explanation
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


1-2, 2, Bureau record identifier - st
4-9, 6, Bureau of Meteorology Station Number.
11-14, 4, Rainfall district code
16-55, 40, Station Name.
57-63, 7, Month/Year site opened. (MM/YYYY)
65-71, 7, Month/Year site closed. (MM/YYYY)
73-80, 8, Latitude to 4 decimal places, in decimal degrees
82-90, 9, Longitude to 4 decimal places, in decimal degrees
92-106, 15, Method by which latitude/longitude was derived
108-110, 3, State
112-117, 6, Height of station above mean sea level in metres
119-124, 6, Height of barometer above mean sea level in metres
126-130, 5, WMO (World Meteorological Organisation) Index Number
132-135, 4, First year of data supplied in data file
137-140, 4, Last year of data supplied in data file
142-144, 3, Percentage complete between first and last records
146-148, 3, Percentage of values with quality flag 'Y'
150-152, 3, Percentage of values with quality flag 'N'
154-156, 3, Percentage of values with quality flag 'W'
158-160, 3, Percentage of values with quality flag 'S'
162-164, 3, Percentage of values with quality flag 'I'
166, 1, # symbol, end of record indicator


